% ~ 2 pages
\chapter*{Introduction}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is currently the largest collider experiment for
fundamental physics research. With its first data taking run, called Run 1,
spanning a time period from 2010 to 2013 at a center-of-mass energy
of~\num{7}\,--\,\SI{8}{\TeV} it allowed the four major experiments ATLAS, CMS,
ALICE and LHCb to probe the frontier of particle physics in proton--proton (and
heavy ion) collisions, enabling tests of the Standard Model on a previously
unreachable energy scale. The first run lead to major achievements, such as the
discovery of a new scalar boson consistent with the Standard Model Higgs
boson~\cite{higgs_atlas, higgs_cms}, evidence and discovery of the rare flavour
changing neutral current decay~$B_s^0 \to \mu \mu$~\cite{lhcb_bs_mumu,
  cms_bs_mumu} and the continued study of hot and dense strongly interacting
matter in heavy ion collisions at unmatched energy densities. In 2015 data
taking was resumed in Run 2 at a $pp$ center-of-mass energy of \SI{13}{\TeV} at
an increased instantaneous luminosity further improving the physics reach. The
Run 2 data taking period ends in 2018 with the Long~Shutdown~2 in preparation of
Run 3 and the High Luminosity LHC.

The tau lepton is an important part of the physics programme at the LHC. Its
large mass makes it an effective probe of the fermionic coupling of the Higgs
boson. Moreover, an enhanced tau lepton production is predicted in several
theories of physics beyond the Standard Model (BSM). Therefore, the tau lepton
is essential to constrain the parameter space of BSM models. While leptonic
decays of the tau lepton into electrons or muons offer a clean signature in the
detector, the largest fraction of tau decays produces hadrons forming a
collimated jet of particles. Jets originating from quarks and gluons, which are
more abundant than tau leptons due to the large multijet production cross
section at the LHC, can fake hadronic tau decays. Therefore, the ATLAS
experiment uses a dedicated identification algorithm~\cite{atlas:taurec:run1,
  atlas:taurec:run2} based on multivariate methods utilising track and shower
shape variables to discriminate hadronically decaying taus from jets. A
well-performing identification algorithm is crucial to reduce backgrounds for
numerous analyses involving hadronic tau decays. A future measurement of a
potential pseudoscalar admixture in the Higgs boson via spin correlations in
$h \to \tau\tau$ decays~\cite{desch_higgs_cp, harnik, Berge2014} requires
selecting hadronic decay modes of the tau lepton with high purity. In the ATLAS
experiment an algorithm to reconstruct the substructure of hadronic tau decays
is employed, which allows to classify the decay mode and improve the mass
reconstruction of ditau resonances~\cite{atlas:taurec:decaymodes}.

This thesis is concerned with the optimisation of the tau identification and
decay mode classification algorithms used in the ATLAS experiment for Run 2 of
the LHC. First the existing identification strategy is improved by revising the
variable selection and optimising the configurations of the multivariate
techniques used in the ATLAS experiment. The recent advances in artificial
neural networks and the availability of computing resources  the creation
of highly complex predictive models even for domains outside of machine learning
research.


A novel approach of performing tau identification based on sequence learning
techniques is presented.

Mention recurrent neural networks

The techniques developed for the tau identification are applied


- Whats done in this thesis Update of the BDT based Tau-ID The developments in
the field of neural networks and the increasing computing power allow to easily
create highly complex models Using novel machine learning techniques based on
recurrent neural networks to improve identification Applying this to decay mode
classification.


- Small preview for each chapter

This thesis summarises the improvements of the algorithm currently used for
tau-identification at the ATLAS experiment. Moreover a novel approach to
identifying hadronic tau-lepton decays based on Recurrent Neural Networks is
presented. Finally the methods are applied to

This thesis is structured as follows: Theoretical Background, ATLAS Experiment
at the LHC, Reconstruction, Energy Calibration and Identification, Machine
Learning, Identification of Hadronic Tau-Lepton Decays using BDTs,
Identification using (Recurrent) Neural Networks, Application in Decay Mode
Classification.

Focus more on whats the content of this thesis. (Should give a good overview of
whats going on if only Introduction \& Conclusion is read by the reader)


The theoretical background is described in Chapter~\ref{sec:theory}

The detector in Chapter~\ref{chap:atlas}

Reconstruction and Energy Calibration of Hadronic Tau Lepton Decays in
Chapter~\ref{sec:reconstruction}

MVA in Chapter~\ref{sec:ml}

BDT based studies in Chapter~\ref{sec:bdt}

RNN based studies in Chapter~\ref{sec:rnn}

Decay mode classification~\ref{sec:decaymode}

\todo[inline]{Short captions}


%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "mythesis"
%%% End:
